# Sudoku Narrative
### *Briefly describe the artifact. What is it? When was it created?*
The Artifact comes in two parts, the first is a puzzle solver and generator that uses multi-dimensional arrays and backtracking to represent and solve Sudoku Puzzles. The second is a playable Sudoku game using PyGame. Sudoku is a popular Japanese number puzzle in which you attempt to fill in all squares on a 27x27 grid with the numbers 1-9, without any repeating numbers in a row column, or 9x9 sub grid. I started work on this project early 2020 to explore recursion.

### *Justify the inclusion of the artifact in your ePortfolio. Why did you select this item? What specific components of the artifact showcase your skills and abilities in algorithms and data structure? How was the artifact improved?*

The use of a recursive backtracking algorithm is the key aspect of this program, and it demonstrates a good understanding of recursive functions, and when to use them to good effect. It also showcases performing a variety of operations on multi-dimensional arrays which is a fairly common and useful skill across all applications of Computer Science. The graphical part of the program shows some competence with designing and implementing a user interface, and also demonstrates learning an external library and working with an API.  The major improvements I made were formatting for readability and long-term maintenance. I also added some more comments on items where I had forgotten exactly how they worked and had to figure it out again. I added some extra graphical user feedback in the game side of the program, rather than relying on the console which I had been previously.

### *Reflect on the process of enhancing and/or modifying the artifact. What did you learn as you were creating it and improving it? What challenges did you face?*

The major takeaway I learned from this project is that recursive algorithms are, tricky, difficult to debug, and should be avoided. But they also shouldn’t be ruled out wholesale and are something worth learning. Knowing recursive algorithms is important for when you come across one in the wild, or if you really need a clever and compact way to solve a problem. In most use cases they should be avoided as they are difficult to debug and create a sort of time bomb for an engineer down the line who might encounter it after you are gone. One of the biggest challenges I faced while working on this was debugging, at one point I was furiously scrawling with a pen and paper trying to map out the recursive iterations to try and conceptualize the bug, and it made me feel a bit crazy. Another large takeaway from this project was a better understanding of scope within Python. Scope, and understanding it fully became very important when working on this project, and a lot of the issues I faced were misunderstandings about how scope worked with different data structures in Python.

[Back](./sudoku)
